---
layout: post
title: Cel Shading | Part 3 - Bump Mapping and Fresnel Lighting
subtitle: Extra lighting details and lighting the edges
bigimg: /img/tut2/part3-banner.png
gh-repo: daniel-ilett/cel-shading
gh-badge: [star, fork, follow]
tags: [shaders, unity, lighting, cel-shading, fresnel]
nice-slug: Fresnel Lighting
date: 2019-06-05
---

Today we'll build on the effect we've built so far and add more detail to our lighting calculations using so-called 'bump mapping'. Then, we'll add a subtle lighting effect on the edges of objects called fresnel lighting.

For this tutorial, I'll only be using surface shaders, but it should be relatively simple to implement a vertex and fragment shader variant using the information contained in this tutorial article.

<hr/>

# Bump Mapping

<hr/>

# Fresnel Lighting

Fresnel lighting (pronounced "fre-nel", with a silent 's') arises when the viewer is looking at an object at a very shallow angle. When looking at a steep angle, the lighting will be as normal - but at shallower angles, a much higher proportion of the light is reflected off the surface; this is especially true of transparent materials, which tend to reflect a higher proportion of light at shallow viewing angles than they transmit through their surfaces. That's why you might not be able to see what's underwater if you're looking at a pool of water at a shallow angle, when the floor is perfectly visible when looking from above.

For us, it'll let us light the edges of objects as they curve away from us - imagine a ball; we'll light the 'edges' of the ball within our vision. It's also known as 'rim lighting' in computer graphics becasue we commonly use it to light the rim of objects.

As established, the fresnel lighting depends on the normal vector of the object and the view vector of the camera to the object - the lighting direction doesn't matter.

<hr/>

# Conclusion

<hr/>
