---
layout: post
title: Image Effects | Part 7 - Wrapping Up
subtitle: Cleaning up a few unexplored concepts
bigimg: /img/tut1/part7-banner.png
gh-repo: daniel-ilett/smo-shaders
gh-badge: [star, fork, follow]
tags: [shaders, unity, image-effects, outro]
nice-slug: Wrapping Up
date: 2019-05-22
---

We've written a lot of shaders so far! I hope you've got to grips with shader-writing and have an idea of where to take things from here. You may have had some questions left unanswered during the rest of the series, so the purpose of this article is to wrap up the series for now and clear up a few of the things that got cut from the other articles for the sake of brevity or not straying too far off-topic.

## How exactly do UV coordinates work?

I skimmed over UV coordinates a little during this series, as understanding them wasn't too important. When you have, say, a 3D model that you wish to apply to a 2D texture to, you have to define exactly how the vertices of the model map to the texture as part of a process called 'texture mapping'. UV coordinates are just a way of telling each vertex in the model where to find the corresponding part of a 2D texture.

This wasn't all that important to us in this series because we always rendered the entire screen to a texture, so we had only the four corners of the screen as our vertices - it's very easy to understand this mapping of coordinates. But on highly complex 3D models, texture mapping can get very involved and complicated.

## What does `TEXCOORD` mean?

Although we used `vert_img`, `appdata_img` and `v2f_img` quite a lot in our shaders, we talked about their implementation way back in Part 0 - you might have noticed `TEXCOORD0` or `TEXCOORD1` at times. `TEXCOORD` stands for 'texture coordinates', and we have a number of these channels which seems to [differ by GPU and Unity version](https://forum.unity.com/threads/number-of-uv-channels-depending-on-platform.583966/) - you specify which channel you're using by using different IDs: `TEXCOORD0`, `TEXCOORD1`, and so on. These semantics tell Unity what level of precision to use and how to pass the data to the GPU.

## I saw you pass a single `float` into a `float4` constructor?

Sometimes we might have done something like this:

~~~glsl
float4 myFunction()
{
    return 1.0;
}
~~~

This does what you probably think it should - it returns `(1.0, 1.0, 1.0, 1.0)`. One of the nice features of shading languages is that they let you do things like this to cut down on typing.

## What is 'swizzling'?

Similarly to the above, we can use the data contained in a vector in multiple ways. For example:

~~~glsl
float4 myVec = float4(1.0, 2.0, 3.0, 4.0);

float3 myNewVec = myVec.xxy;
~~~

In this case, the value of `myNewVec` will be `(1.0, 1.0, 2.0)`. This is called a 'swizzling operator', and we can take all kinds of combinations of values; it's worth noting that we can use both `.xyzw` and `.rgba`, and both mean the same thing:

~~~glsl
float4 myOtherNewVec = myVec.wxxz;
float3 myOtherOtherNewVec = myVec.gbr;
~~~

It's a powerful shorthand. If you take a look at the HSV conversion code we used in Part 4, it extensively uses swizzling.

## How exactly does the `_ST` version of a sampler work?

We discussed this in one of the earlier tutorials - all textures passed as `sampler2D` have a `_ST` variant which contains texture scale and offset values. It's a `float4`, for which the `.xy` components contain the scale in the x- and y-directions respectively, and the `.zw` components contain offsets in the x- and y-directions respectively. When UV coordinates are used to sample the texture, we might first want to apply these scale and offset parameters to the texture to ensure the correct part of the texture is sampled; for that, the `TRANSFORM_TEX()` function can be used.

## World space? Clip space? Screen space?

Imagine that Unity contains its objects in some abstract space. In practice, this is exactly the case - there's no inherent meaning behind the units in Unity's transform system, but it's commonly assumed that positions are measured in metres. In order for the camera rendering the scene to understand where objects are, there is a transformation matrix applied to the positions of every object that results in new positions relative to the camera. This obtains new positions defined in 'camera space'.

There's then another transformation matrix applied to those positions that takes the shape of the camera frustum - discussed in Part 3 - into account, and results in another set of positions that are essentially relative to an abstract 2D plane. That set of positions is called 'clip space' - everything outside the range [0, 1] in either axis on this abstract 2D plane is discarded. The positions in clip space are then mapped to the pixels on your physical screen - this is called 'screen space'. It can be a little bit confusing because there are so many transformations, but many are implicitly performed for us, and many can be combined together into a single matrix that we used before: `UnityObjectToClipPos()` takes a vertex directly from Unity world space to clip space.

## What precisely is the difference between Cg, HLSL and GLSL?

Alright, so: High-Level Shading Language (HLSL) and OpenGL Shading Language (GLSL) are both shading languages - that is, they're compiled to instructions that can run directly on your graphics card (GPU). HLSL is used for DirectX, Microsoft's proprietary graphics library that runs on Windows and Xbox machines, while GLSL is used with OpenGL, a specification for a graphics pipeline that is impelmented in pretty much every device. Nvidia's Cg language is a weird middle step that supports all common features of both HLSL and GLSL, and outputs code in one of those languages depending on the hardware. It's no longer officially supported by Nvidia. It's possible to use any one of these three shading languages in Unity (with ShaderLab acting as a wrapper around them), although the one most commonly used is Cg because of its portability.

<hr/>

# Conclusion

Thus concludes the first part of the Super Mario Odyssey shaders series. I have more effects planned for future posts, but I'd like to move on to something else for a little while to keep things exciting.

<hr/>
